---
title: Multipath Extension for QUIC
abbrev: MP-QUIC
docname: draft-deconinck-quic-multipath-01
date: today
category: std
updates:

ipr: trust200902
area: Transport
workgroup: QUIC Working Group
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
  ins: Q. De Coninck
  name: Quentin De Coninck
  organization: UCLouvain
  email: quentin.deconinck@uclouvain.be
 -
  ins: O. Bonaventure
  name: Olivier Bonaventure
  organization: UCLouvain
  email: Olivier.Bonaventure@uclouvain.be

normative:
  RFC2119:
  I-D.ietf-quic-transport:
  I-D.ietf-quic-tls:
  I-D.ietf-quic-recovery:
  I-D.ietf-quic-invariants:
informative:
  I-D.huitema-quic-mpath-req:
  RFC0793:
  RFC6356:
  RFC6824:
  RFC8041:
  Cellnet:
     title: "Exploring Mobile/WiFi Handover with Multipath TCP"
     date: "2012"
     seriesinfo: "ACM SIGCOMM workshop on Cellular Networks (Cellnet'12)"
     author:
     -
       ins: C. Paasch
     -
       ins: G. Detal
     -
       ins: F. Duchene
     -
       ins: C. Raiciu
     -
       ins: O. Bonaventure
  MPRTP:
     title: "MPRTP: Multipath considerations for real-time media"
     date: "2013"
     seriesinfo: "Proceedings of the 4th ACM Multimedia Systems Conference"
     author:
      -
        ins: V. Singh
        name:
        org: Aalto University
      -
        ins: S. Ahsan
        name: Saba Ahsan
        org: Aalto University
      -
        ins: J. Ott
        name: Jorg Ott
        org: Aalto University
  SCTPCMT:
     title: "Concurrent multipath transfer using SCTP multihoming over independent end-to-end paths"
     date: "2006"
     seriesinfo: "IEEE/ACM Transactions on networking, Vol. 14, no 5"
     author:
     -
       ins: J. Iyengar
     -
       ins: P. Amer
     -
       ins: R. Stewart
  OLIA:
    title: "MPTCP is not pareto-optimal: performance issues and a possible solution"
    date: "2012"
    seriesinfo: "Proceedings of the 8th international conference on Emerging networking experiments and technologies, ACM"
    author:
    -
      ins: R. Khalili
    -
      ins: N. Gast
    -
      ins: M. Popovic
    -
      ins: U. Upadhyay
    -
      ins: J.-Y. Le Boudec
  MPQUIC:
    title: "Multipath QUIC: Design and Evaluation"
    date: "Dec. 2017"
    seriesinfo: "13th International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies (CoNEXT 2017). http://multipath-quic.org"
    author:
    -   
       ins: Q. De Coninck
    -
       ins: O. Bonaventure
  IETFJ:
    title: "Multipath TCP Deployments"   
    date: "Nov. 2016"
    seriesinfo: "IETF Journal"
    author:
    -
        ins: O. Bonaventure
    -
        ins: S. Seo

--- abstract

This document proposes extensions to the QUIC protocol to enable the usage of
multiple paths over a single connection. Those changes remain compliant with
the current single-path QUIC design. They allow devices to benefit from
multiple network paths while preserving the privacy features of QUIC.


--- middle

Introduction
============

Endhosts have evolved. Today's endhosts are equipped with several network
interfaces and users expect to be able to seamlessly switch from one to
another or use them simultaneously to aggregate bandwidth. During the last
years, several multipath extensions to transport protocols have been proposed
{{RFC6824}},{{MPRTP}},{{SCTPCMT}}. Multipath TCP {{RFC6824}} is the most
mature one. It is already deployed on popular smartphones and for other use
cases {{RFC8041}}.

With regular TCP and UDP, all the packets that belong to a given flow contain
the same 5-tuple that acts as an identifier for this flow. This prevents such
flows from using multiple paths. QUIC {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} does not use
the 5-tuple as an implicit connection identifier. A QUIC flow is identified by
its Connection ID. This enables QUIC flows to cope with events affecting the
5-tuple, such as NAT rebinding or IP address changes. The QUIC connection
migration feature, described in more details in
{{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}, is key to migrate a flow from one 5-tuple to
another one. This migration feature offers the opportunity for QUIC to use
multiple paths. Use cases such as bandwidth aggregation or seamless network
handovers would be applicable to QUIC, as they are now with Multipath TCP. A
first performance evaluation of such use cases and a comparison between
Multipath QUIC and Multipath TCP may be found in {{MPQUIC}}.

In this draft, we leverage many of the lessons learned from the design of
Multipath TCP and comments received on the first version of this draft to
propose extensions to the current QUIC design to enable it to simultaneously
use several paths. This document is organized as follows. It first provides in
{{overview}} an overview of the operation of Multipath QUIC. It then states
changes required in the current QUIC design {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} and
specifies in {{spec}} the usage of multiple paths. Finally, it discusses some
security considerations.


Conventions and Definitions
===========================

The words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", and "MAY" are used in this
document.  It's not shouting; when they are capitalized, they have
the special meaning defined in {{RFC2119}}.

We assume that the reader is familiar with the terminology used in
the QUIC documents {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}. In addition, we define:

- Path: A logical association between two hosts over which packets
  can be sent. A path is internally identified by a Path ID and uses a
  potentially changing Connection ID in packets exchanged on that path.

- Initial Path: The path used for the establishment of the QUIC connection.
  The cryptographic handshake is done on this path. It is identified
  by Path ID 0.


Notational Conventions
----------------------

Packet and frame diagrams use the format described in Section 2.1 of
{{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}, with the following additional convention:

x (j) ... Indicates that x uses the variable-length encoding scheme described
  in {{variable-length-pid}}.

Overview {#overview}
========

The current design of QUIC {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} provides reliable
transport with multiplexing and security. A wide range of devices on today's
Internet are multihomed. Examples include smartphones equipped with both WiFi
and cellular interfaces, but also regular dual-stack hosts that use both IPv4
and IPv6. Experience with Multipath TCP has shown that the ability to combine
different paths during the lifetime of a connection provides various benefits
including bandwidth aggregation or seamless handovers {{RFC8041}},{{IETFJ}}.

The current design of QUIC does not enable multihomed devices to efficiently
use different paths. We first explain why a multipath extension would be
beneficial to QUIC and then describe it at a high level.

What is a Path?
---------------

Before going into details, let us first define what is called a "path". A path
is a UDP flow between two hosts denoted by a 4-tuple (source IP address,
destination IP address, source port, destination port). On a smartphone
interacting with a single-homed server, the mobile device might want to use
one path over the WiFi network and another over the cellular one. Those paths
are not necessarily disjoint. For example, when interacting with a dual-stack
server, a smartphone may create two paths over the WiFi network, one over IPv4
and the other over IPv6.


Beyond Connection Migration
---------------------------

Unlike TCP {{RFC0793}}, QUIC is not bound to a particular 4-tuple during the
lifetime of a connection. A QUIC connection is identified by a Connection ID,
placed in the public header of each QUIC packet. This enables hosts to continue
the connection even if the 4-tuple changes due to, e.g., NAT rebinding. This
ability to shift a connection from one 4-tuple to another is called Connection
Migration. Another of its use cases is fail-over when the address in use fails
but another one is available. A mobile device loosing the WiFi connectivity
can then continue the connection over its cellular interface.

A QUIC connection can thus start on a given path and end on another one.
However, the current QUIC design {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} assumes that only
one path is in use for a given connection. Instead of switching the 4-tuple
for the whole connection, this draft first proposes mechanisms to communicate
endhost addresses to the peer. It then leverage the address validation process
with the PATH_CHALLENGE and PATH_RESPONSE frames proposed in
{{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} to verify if additional addresses advertised by
the communicating host are available and actually belong to it. In this case,
those addresses can be used to create new paths to spread packets over several
networks. The example of {{examplempquic}} shows a possible data exchange
between a dual-homed client performing a request fitting in two packets and a
single-homed server.


~~~~~~~~~~
Server                          Phone                          Server
via WiFi                                                      via LTE
-------                        -------                          -----
  | Pkt(CID=A,PN=1,frames=[       |                               |
  |  STREAM("Request (1/2)")])    | Pkt(CID=B,PN=1,frames=[       |
  |<------------------------------|  STREAM("Request (2/2)")])    |
  | Pkt(CID=A,PN=1,frames=[       |--------                       |
  |  ACK(PID=1,LargestAcked=1)])  |       |----------             |
  |------------------------------>|                 |----------   |
  | Pkt(CID=A,PN=2,frames=[       |                           |-->|
  |  STREAM("Response 1")])       | Pkt(CID=B,PN=1,frames=[       |
  |------------------------------>|  ACK(PID=2,LargestAcked=1),   |
  |                               |  STREAM("Response 2")])   ----|
  | Pkt(CID=A,PN=2,frames=[       |                 ----------|   |
  |  ACK(PID=1, LargestAcked=2),  |       ----------|             |
  |  ACK(PID=2, LargestAcked=1)]) |<------|                       |
  |<------------------------------|                               |
  | Pkt(CID=A,PN=3,frames=[       | Pkt(CID=B,PN=2,frames=[       |
  |  STREAM("Response 3")])       |  STREAM("Response 4")])       |
  |------------------------------>|                           ----|
  |                               |                 ----------|   |
  |            ...                |  ...  <---------|             |
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #examplempquic title="Dataflow with Multipath QUIC"}


The remaining of this section focuses on providing a high-level overview of the
multipath operations in QUIC.


Establishment of a Multipath QUIC Connection
--------------------------------------------

A Multipath QUIC connection starts like a regular QUIC connection. A
cryptographic handshake takes place over Stream ID 0 and follows the classical
process {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} {{I-D.ietf-quic-tls}}. It is during that
process that the multipath capability is negotiated between hosts. This is
performed using the max_path_id transportparameter, where both hosts advertise
the maximum number of paths, in addition to the first one, that they are able
to use over the connection. The negotiated value will determine how many bytes
will be used to encode the Path ID in frames. If one of the hosts does not
advertise the max_path_id transport parameter, the negotiated value is 0,
meaning that the QUIC connection will remain single-path.

The handshake is performed on a given path. This path is called the Initial
path and is identified by Path ID 0.


Architecture of Multipath QUIC
------------------------------

Once established, a Multipath QUIC connection is composed of one or more
paths. Each path is associated with a different four-tuple and identified by a
Path ID, as shown in {{architectural}}.

~~~~~~~~~~
          +---------------------------------------------+
          |              Connection (MCID)              |
          |   +--------+ +--------+ ... +------------+  |
          |   | Path 0 | | Path 1 |     | Path N - 1 |  |
          |   | Tuple  | | Tuple' | ... |   Tuple"   |  |
          |   |  PCID  | |  PCID' |     |    PCID"   |  |
          |   |  PN    | |  PN'   |     |    PN"     |  |
          |   +--------+ +--------+ ... +------------+  |
          +---------------------------------------------+
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #architectural title="Architectural view of Multipath QUIC"}

As described before, a Multipath QUIC connection starts on the Initial Path,
identified by Path ID 0. For Multipath QUIC, this draft proposes two levels of
Connection IDs. The first one is the Master Connection ID (MCID). It uniquely
identifies the connection, as with the current QUIC design. The second one is
the Path Connection ID (PCID). Packets belonging to a given path share the
same PCID written in the Connection ID field of the public header. The PCID
acts as an implicit path identifier for packets. Preventing the linkability of
different paths is an important requirement for the multipath extension
{{I-D.huitema-quic-mpath-req}}. Using PCID as implicit path identifier makes
this linkability harder than having explicit signaling as in the previous
version of this draft and does not require public header change to keep
invariants {{I-D.ietf-quic-invariants}}. The MCID of a connection will be the
PCID of the Initial Path. In the example of {{examplempquic}}, if the
connection started on the WiFi network, then Connection ID A is both the PCID
of the WiFi path and the MCID of the connection.

In addition to the PCID, some additional information is kept for each path.
The Path ID identifies the path at the frame level and ensures uniqueness of
the nonce (see {{nonce-considerations}} for details). A congestion window is
maintained for each path. Hosts can also collect network measurements on a
per-path basis, such as round-trip-time measurements and lost packets.


Path Establishment
------------------

The max_path_id transport parameter exchanged during the cryptographic
handshake determines an upper bound on the number of paths that can be created
over the connection, in addition to the Initial one. Then, hosts must agree on
which paths can be used, and with which Path Connection IDs. Unlike Multipath
TCP {{RFC6824}}, the server dynamically controls how many paths can currently
be in use. This can be done using a new MAX_PATHS frame indicating how many
additional paths can be simultaneously in use.

The server proposes new paths with an extended version of the
NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame (see {{newconnectionidsec}}). That frame proposes a
PCID for a given Path ID. Once the client receives and acknowledges the frame,
it can start using the new path by placing the PCID in the Connection ID field
of the packets. The server can start using a path once the corresponding
NEW_CONNECTION_ID has been acknowledged. Both hosts store the NEW_CONNECTION_ID
information in order to cope with the remote trying to use a new path. As
frames are encrypted, the establishment of new paths does not leak cleartext
identifiers {{I-D.huitema-quic-mpath-req}}.

A server might provide more Path IDs with NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames than the
value advertised in the MAX_PATHS frame. This can be useful to cope with
migration cases, as described in {{path-migration}}. In such cases, hosts can
only use a subset of the proposed Path IDs. Multipath QUIC is fully
symmetrical. Both the client and the server can start using new paths once
their corresponding PCID have been negotiated. It might happen that both hosts
try to create paths with different Path IDs, such that there are more paths
than the advertised number in MAX_PATHS frame. In that case, the paths with
the lowest Path IDs will be used while the others will stop.

The client is not able to create new paths as long as the server does not send
NEW_CONNECTION_ID and MAX_PATHS frames. To limit the latency of the path
handshake, the server can send those frames just after the 0-RTT handshake
packet.

Although a path can be first used by any host, it might not be practical for
one of the peers to send an initial packet on new paths. A possible cause is
when a server wants to initiate a new path to a client behind a NAT. The
client would possibly never receive this packet, leading to connectivity
issues on that path. To avoid such issues, a remote address MUST have been
validated as described in {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} before sending packets
on a path using it.


Exchanging Data over Multiple Paths
-----------------------------------

A QUIC packet acts as a container for one of more frames. Multipath QUIC uses
the same STREAM frames as QUIC to carry data. A byte offset is associated to
the data payload. One of the key design decision of (Multipath) QUIC is that
frames are independent of the packets carrying them. This implies that a frame
transmitted over one path could be retransmitted later on another path without
any change.

The path on which data is sent is a packet-level information. This means a
frame can be sent regardless of the path of the packet carrying it.
Furthermore, because the data offset is a frame-level information, there is no
need to define additional sequence numbers to cope with reordering across
paths, unlike Multipath TCP {{RFC6824}} that uses a Data Sequence Number at the
MPTCP level. Other flow control considerations like the stream receive window
advertised by the MAX_STREAM_DATA frame remain unchanged when there are
multiple paths.

However, Multipath QUIC might face reordering at packet-level when using paths
having different latencies. The presence of the Path ID in the public header
ensures that the packets sent over a given path will contain monotonically
increasing packet numbers. To ensure more flexibility and potentially to
reduce the ACK block section of the ACK frame when aggregating bandwidth of
paths exhibiting different network characteristics, each path keeps its own
monotonically increasing Packet Number space. This potentially allows sending
up to 2^32 * 2^62 packets on a QUIC connection since each path has its own
packet number space.

The ACK frame is also modified to allow per-path packet acknowledgments. This
remains compliant with the independence between packets and frames while
providing more flexibility to hosts to decide on which path they want to send
path acknowledgments. Looking again at {{examplempquic}}, packets that were
sent over a given path (e.g., the response2 packet on path 2 with CID B) can
be acknowledged on another path (here, path 1 with CID A) to limit the latency
due to ACK transmissions on high-latency paths. Such scheduling decision would
not have been possible in Multipath TCP {{RFC6824}} which must acknowledge
data on the path is was received on.


Exchanging Addresses
--------------------

When a multi-homed mobile device connects to a dual-stacked server on its IPv4
address, it is aware of its local addresses (e.g., the WiFi and the cellular
ones) and the IPv4 remote address used to establish the QUIC connection. If
the client wants to create new paths over IPv6, it needs to learn the other
addresses of the remote peer.

This is possible with the ADD_ADDRESS frames that are sent by a Multipath QUIC
host to advertise its current addresses. Each advertised address is identified
by an Address ID. The addresses attached to a host can vary during the
lifetime of a Multipath QUIC connection. A new ADD_ADDRESS frame is
transmitted when a host has a new address. This ADD_ADDRESS frame is protected
as other QUIC control frames, which implies that it cannot be spoofed by
attackers. The communicated address is first validated by the receiving host
before it starts using it. This ensures that the address actually belongs to
the peer and that the peer can send and receive packets on that address. It
also prevents hosts from launching amplification attacks to a victim address.

If the client is behind a NAT, it could announce a private address in an
ADD_ADDRESS frame. In such situations, the server would not be able to
validate the communicated address. The client might still use its NATed address
to start a new path. To enable the server to make the link between the private
and the public addresses, Multipath QUIC provides the PATHS frame that lists
current active Path IDs of the sending host. A path is called active when it
was created over a validated 4-tuple and is still in use. The frame indicates
the local Address ID that the path uses. With this information, the server can
then validate the public address and associate the advertised with the
perceived addresses.


Coping with Address Removals
----------------------------

During the lifetime of a QUIC connection, a host might lose some of its
addresses. A concrete example is a smartphone going out of reachability of a
WiFi network or shutting off one of its network interfaces. Such address
removals are advertised by using REMOVE_ADDRESS frames. The REMOVE_ADDRESS
frame contains the Address ID of the lost address previously communicated
through ADD_ADDRESS.


Path Migration {#path-migration}
--------------

At a given time, a Multipath QUIC connection gathers a set of paths, each
using a 4-tuple. To address privacy issues due to the linkability of addresses
with Connection IDs, hosts should avoid changing the 4-tuple used by a path.
There remain situations where this change is unavoidable. These can be
categorized into two groups: host-aware changes (e.g., network handover from
WiFi to cellular) and host-unaware changes (e.g., NAT rebinding).

For the host-aware case, let us consider the case of a Multipath QUIC
connection where the client is a smartphone with both WiFi and cellular. It
advertised both addresses and the server currently enables only one path, the
Initial one. The Initial Path uses the WiFi address. Then, for some reason,
the WiFi address becomes unusable. To preserve connectivity, the client might
then decide to use the cellular address for the Initial Path. It thus sends a
REMOVE_ADDRESS announcing the loss of the WiFi address and a PATHS frame to
inform that the Initial Path is now using the cellular address. If the
cellular address validation succeeds (which could have been done as soon as
the cellular address was advertised), the server can continue exchanging data
through the cellular address.

However, both server and client might want to change the path used on the
cellular address for privacy concerns. If the server provides an additional
path (e.g., Path ID 42) through NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame at the beginning of
the connection, the client can perform the path change directly and avoid
using the Initial Path Path Connection ID on the cellular network. This can be
done using the PATH_UPDATE frame. It can indicate that the host stopped to use
the Initial Path to use Path ID 42 instead. This frame is placed in the first
packet sent to the new path with its corresponding PCID. The client can then
send the REMOVE_ADDRESS and PATHS frames on this new path. Compared to the
previous case, it is harder to link the paths with the IP addresses to observe
that they belong to the same Multipath QUIC connection.

For the host-unaware case, the situation is similar. In case of NAT rebinding,
the server will observe a change in the 2-tuple (source IP, source port) of the
packet. The server first validates that the 2-tuple actually belongs to the
client {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}. If it is the case, the server can send a
PATH_UPDATE frame on a previously communicated but unused Path ID. The client
might have sent some packets with a given PCID on a different 4-tuple, but the
server did not use the given PCID on that 4-tuple.


Congestion Control
------------------

The QUIC congestion control scheme is defined in {{I-D.ietf-quic-recovery}}.
This congestion control scheme is not suitable when several paths are active.
Using the congestion control scheme defined in {{I-D.ietf-quic-recovery}} with
Multipath QUIC would result in unfairness. Each path of a Multipath QUIC
connection MUST have its own congestion window. The windows of the different
paths MUST be coupled together. Multipath TCP uses the LIA congestion control
scheme specified in {{RFC6356}}. This scheme can immediately be adapted to
Multipath QUIC. Other coupled congestion control schemes have been proposed
for Multipath TCP such as {{OLIA}}.


Mapping Path ID to Connection ID
================================

As described in the overview section, hosts need to identify on which path
packets are sent. The Path ID must then be inferred from the public header.
This is done by using Path Connection ID in addition to the connection Master
Connection ID.

The Master Connection ID is determined during the cryptographic handshake and
actually corresponds to the Connection ID in the current QUIC design
{{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}. The Path Connection ID of the Initial path (with
Path ID 0) is equal to the Master Connection ID. The Path Connection ID of the
other paths are determined when the NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames are exchanged.

The server MUST ensure that all advertised Path Connection IDs are available
for the whole connection lifetime. Once it sends a NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame
containing the PCID, the server can start receiving packets with the
advertised Connection ID as belonging to the corresponding path. The server
MUST wait until the reception of the frame acknowledgment before starting to
send packets on that path.

Upon reception of the NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame, the client MUST acknowledge it
and MUST store the advertised Path Connection ID and the Path ID of the
proposed path. It MUST ensure that it can receive packets coming from the
server using the PCID and associate it with the corresponding Path ID.


Using Multiple Paths {#spec}
====================

This section describes in details the multipath operations with the QUIC
protocol.


Multipath Negotiation
---------------------

The Multipath Negotiation takes place during the cryptographic handshake with
the max_path_id transport parameter. A QUIC connection is initially
single-path in QUIC, and all packets prior to handshake completion MUST be
exchanged over the Initial Path. During this process, hosts advertise the
maximum path ID they are willing to use. The maximum path ID that can be used
over a connection is the minimum of both advertised values. If one host does
not send the max_path_id transport parameter during the cryptographic
handshake, the remote MUST assume a value of 0, leading to a single-path
connection over the Initial Path. NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames can later propose
Path IDs in the range of max_path_id inclusive. If a client receives a
NEW_CONNECTION_ID proposing a Path ID greater than the negotiated maximum
value, it MUST trigger a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with an error code set to 0x10b
with a reason phrase describing this issue.


### Transport Parameter Definition {#tp-definition}

An endhost MAY use the following transport parameter:

max_path_id (0x0020):

 :  The maximum path ID transport parameter indicates the number of paths in
    addition to the Initial Path that the host agrees to support over the
    connection, encoded as an unsigned 32-bit integer. This sets a upper bound
    on the Path IDs that can be used. The default value for this parameter is
    0, meaning that a host omitting this transport parameter does not agree to
    use multiple paths over the connection.


Variable-Length Encoding of the Path ID {#variable-length-pid}
---------------------------------------

From the negotiated maximum Path ID, hosts can infer the amount of bits
required to encode the Path ID. If the maximum Path ID is 255, only one byte
suffices. Similarly, if one of the hosts wants a single-path connection,
either by advertising a max_path_id of 0 or by omitting it, the Path ID field
should not be present.

| Negotiated Max Path ID Range | Path ID Field Length (Bytes) |
|:-----------------------------|:-----------------------------|
| 0                            | 0                            |
| 1-255                        | 1                            |
| 256-65535                    | 2                            |
| 65536-4294967295             | 4                            |
{: #vle-pid-table title="Summary of Path ID Encodings"}

The proposed encoding is summarized in {{vle-pid-table}}.

Because of security considerations described in {{nonce-considerations}}, a
host reusing packet numbers across paths must limit the number of advertised
paths depending on the size of the Initial Value. In particular, a host MUST
NOT advertise a max_path_id whose field length exceeds (Initial Value Length)
- 8.


Coping with Additional Remote Addresses
---------------------------------------

The usage of multiple networks paths if often done using multiple IP
addresses. For instance, a smartphone willing to use both WiFi and LTE will
use the corresponding addresses provided by the networks. It can then safely
send packets to a previously-used IP address of a server. The server can
receive packets with different IPs, but it MUST first validate the new remote
IP addresses before starting sending packets to those addresses.

Similarly, additional addresses could be communicated using ADD_ADDRESS frames.
Such addresses MUST be validated before starting to send packets to them. This
requirement is explained in {{validation_address}}.

The validation of an address could be performed with PATH_CHALLENGE and
PATH_RESPONSE frames as described in {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}. A validated
address MAY be cached for a given host for a limited amount of time.


Path State
----------

During the Multipath QUIC connection, hosts maintain some state for paths.
Information about the path that hosts are required to store depends on its
state. The possible path states are depicted in {{path_state}}.

~~~~~~~~~~
+----------+  
| PROPOSED |
+----------+               
      |
      | path usage
      |
      |       restricted by MAX_PATHS
      v    or affected by REMOVE_ADDRESS
 +--------+ --------------------------> +----------+
 | ACTIVE |       reusing path          | UNUSABLE |
 +--------+ <-------------------------- +----------+
      |                                       |
      | PATH_UPDATE                           |
      +---------------------------------------+
      |
      v
 +--------+
 | CLOSED |
 +--------+
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #path_state title="Finite-State Machine of paths"}

Once a path has been proposed in a NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame, it is in the
PROPOSED state. In this situation, hosts MUST keep the following path
information:

* Path ID: encoded as a 4-byte integer. It uniquely identifies the path in the
  connection. This value is immutable.
* Master Connection ID: encoded as a 8-byte number. It makes the link between
  the path and the QUIC connection it belongs to. This value is immutable.
* Path Connection ID: encoded as a 8-byte integer. It makes the link between
  the packet's Connection ID field and the path. This value can be updated
  with subsequent NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames.
* Path State: the current state of the path, one of the values presented in
  {{path_state}}.

Hosts MUST ensure that they can associate a packet with the PCID and its
corresponding path at any time, as they must be ready to figure out the path
used by the remote host.

Either the host received a packet with the corresponding PCID coming from a
validated address or it wants to start using the path to a validated address,
the path goes to the ACTIVE state. This is the state where a path can be used
to send and receive packets. In addition to the fields required in the PROPOSED
state, the following elements MUST be tracked:

* Packet Number Space: each path is associated with its own monotonically
  increasing packet number space. Each endpoint maintains a separate packet
  number for sending and receiving packets. Packet number considerations
  described in {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} apply within a given path.
* Current 4-tuple: the tuple (sIP, dIP, sport, dport) used to send or receive  
  packets over this path. This value is mutable, either because the host
  decides to change its local address and/or port, or because it receives a
  packet with a different validated remote address and/or port than the one
  currently recorded. A host that changes the 4-tuple of a path SHOULD migrate
  it.
* Current (local Address ID, remote Address ID) tuple: those identifiers come
  from the ADD_ADDRESS sent (local) and received (remote). This enables a host
  to mark a path as UNUSABLE when, e.g., the remote Address ID is declared as
  lost in a REMOVE_ADDRESS. The addresses on which the connection was
  established have Address ID 0. The reception of PATHS frames helps hosts to
  associate the remote Address ID used by the path.
* Performance metrics: basic statistics such as round-trip-time or number of
  packets sent and received can be collected on a per-path basis. This
  information can be useful when a host needs to perform packet scheduling
  decisions and flow control management.

It might happen that a path is temporarily unavailable, because one of the
endpoint's addresses is no more available or because the server decided to
decrease the number of active paths. In such cases, the path is in UNUSABLE
state and the host MUST NOT send packets on it. The host keeps the same
information as in the ACTIVE state for the path. It might happen that packets
are received on that path. If the path is in UNUSABLE state because of a
decrease of the active paths, packets MUST be discarded silently. If it is
because a REMOVE_ADDRESS was received for the remote Address ID of the path,
the host SHOULD validate the remote address first before reusing it. If this
validation suceeds, or the number of paths increased again, a path in the
UNUSABLE state can go into ACTIVE state, but its congestion window MUST be
restarted and its performance metrics SHOULD be reset.

Eventually, a path may either be migrated to another one or closed. This is
signalled by the PATH_UPDATE frame. In that case, the path is in CLOSED state.
In that state, packets MUST NOT be sent or received over it. A host MUST keep
the same path state field as in the PROPOSED state, to avoid ambiguities and
CLOSED path reuse.


Dynamic Management of Paths
---------------------------

The server is the main protagonist in determining how many paths can be used
over a Multipath QUIC connection. It is its reponsibility to propose Path IDs
with corresponding PCIDs that could be used by the client. In addition, it
dynamically controls the number of active paths that can be used for the
connection. This is performed by sending the MAX_PATHS frame that sets an
upper limit on the number of additional active paths. A host can propose more
Path IDs with NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames than the number of additional paths it
agrees to use simultaneously. This can be useful in migration scenarios, where
the server wants to share a pool of Path IDs that can be directly used to
migrate paths.

As long as no MAX_PATHS frame was received from the server, the client MUST
assume that only one path can be used. At the beginning of the QUIC connection,
this means that only the Initial Path can be used. In this case however,
during the connection, another path can be used, but the Initial Path MUST
have been migrated to it. The server can then increase the value advertised in
the MAX_PATHS frame to allow hosts to use new paths among the proposed Path ID
pool.

By default, the client does not set any limit to the number of paths which can
be used. If a client wants to limit the number of (additional) paths the server
can use, it can also send a MAX_PATHS frame. In this case, the number of
additional paths that can be used over the connection is the minimum between
last advertised value from both sides.

A host can also decrease the number of paths that can be used over a
connection. If this value decreases below the current number of active paths,
hosts MUST put in UNUSABLE state the paths in the ACTIVE state with the
highest Path IDs. Server and client MUST stop sending packets over UNUSABLE
paths once the MAX_PATHS has been sent or received. The host restricting the
number of paths SHOULD allow receiving packets on newly UNUSABLE paths for one
round-trip-time. After this delay, hosts SHOULD silently discard received
packets.

When the server proposes more Path IDs than the negotiated maximum number of
ACTIVE paths, it might happen that both hosts decide at the same time to create
paths with different Path IDs, such as there are more created paths than the
negotiated maximum value. In this case, the hosts MUST only keep as ACTIVE the
paths with the lowest Path IDs. Paths with the highest Path IDs are in the
UNUSABLE state and packets SHOULD be silently discarded.


Loosing Addresses
-----------------

During the lifetime of a connection, a host might lose addresses, e.g., a
network interface that was shut down. All the ACTIVE paths that were using
that local address MUST be set in the UNUSABLE state. To advertise the address
loss to the peer, the host MUST send a REMOVE_ADDRESS frame indicating which
Address IDs has been lost. The host MUST also send a PATHS frame indicating
the status of the remaining ACTIVE paths.

Upon reception of the REMOVE_ADDRESS, the receiving host MUST set the ACTIVE
paths affected by the address removal into the UNUSABLE state.

The host that locally lost the address MAY reuse one of these paths by changing
the assigned 4-tuple. In this case, it MUST send a PATHS frame describing that
change.


Scheduling Strategies
---------------------

The current QUIC design {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} offers a two-dimensional
scheduling space, i.e., which frames will be packed inside a given packet.
With the use of multiple paths, a third dimension is added, i.e., the path on
which the packet will be sent. This dimension can have a non negligible impact
on the operations of Multipath QUIC, especially if the available paths exhibit
very different network characteristics.

The progression of the data flow depends on the reception of the MAX_DATA and
MAX_STREAM_DATA frames. Those frames SHOULD be duplicated on several or all
paths in use. This would limit the head-of-line blocking issue due to the
transmission of the frames over a slow path.

The path on which ACK frames are sent impacts the peer. The ACK frame is
notably used to determine the latency of a path. If the ACK frame is sent on
the path it acknowledges, then the peer can compute the round-trip-time of that
path. Otherwise, the peer would compute the latency as the sum of the foward
delay of the acknowledged path and the return delay of the path used to send
the ACK frame. Choosing between acknowledging packets on the same path or on a
specific path is up to the implementation. However, hosts SHOULD keep a
consistent acknowledgement strategy. Selecting a random path to acknowledge
packets will possibly increase the variability of the latency estimation,
especially if paths exhibit very different network characteristics. Unlike
MAX_DATA and MAX_STREAM_DATA, ACK frames SHOULD NOT be systematically
duplicated on several paths as they can induce a large network overhead.


Modifications to QUIC frames
============================

The multipath extension allows hosts to send packets over multiple paths.
Since nearly all QUIC frames are independent of packets, no change is
required for most of them. The only exceptions are the NEW_CONNECTION_ID and
the ACK frames. The NEW_CONNECTION_ID is modified to provide Path Connection
ID negotiation for each path. The ACK frame contains packet-level information
with the Largest Acknowledged field. Since the Packet Numbers are now
associated to paths, the ACK frame must contain the Path ID it acknowledges.


NEW_CONNECTION_ID Frame {#newconnectionidsec}
-----------------------

The NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame (type=0x0b) as defined by
{{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} keeps its ability to provide the client with
alternative connection IDs that can be used to break linkability when
migrating connections. It also allows the server to indicate which connection
IDs the client must use to take advantage of multiple paths.

The NEW_CONNECTION_ID is as follows:

~~~~~~~~~~
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                          Path ID  (j)                       ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                          Sequence (i)                       ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
+                        Connection ID (64)                     +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+                   Stateless Reset Token (128)                 +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #newconnectionid title="NEW_CONNECTION_ID adapted to Multipath QUIC"}

Compared to the frame specified in {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}, a Path ID
field of variable size is prefixed to associate the Path ID with the Connection
ID. If the multipath extension was not negotiated during the connection
establishment, the NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame is the same as the one presented in
{{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}. This frame MUST only be sent by the server. Upon
reception of the frame with a specified path ID, the client can start using
the new path with the matching Connection ID.

A host MUST NOT start using a path if no related NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame has
been received (at client side) or acknowledged (at server side). To limit the
delay of the multipath usage upon handshake completion, the server SHOULD send
NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames for paths it allows using as soon the connection
establishment completes.

To cope with privacy issues, it should be hard to make the link between two
different connections or two different paths of a same connection by just
looking at the Connection ID contained in packets. Therefore, Path Connection
IDs chosen by the server MUST be random.

It might happen that a server proposes a Connection ID in a NEW_CONNECTION_ID
frame that is already in use by the client for another connection with another
server. In such cases, the client MUST warn the server that this Connection ID
is not available and ask for another Connection ID. This request for asking
another Connection ID for a particular path will follow the same mechanism as
described in {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}.


ACK Frame
---------

The format of the modified ACK frame is shown below.

~~~~~~~~~~
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                           Path ID (j)                       ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                    Largest Acknowledged (i)                 ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                          ACK Delay (i)                      ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                       ACK Block Count (i)                   ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                          ACK Blocks (*)                     ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #ack_frame title="ACK Frame adapted to Multipath"}

Compared to the ACK frame in the current QUIC design
{{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}, the ACK frame is prefixed by a variable size Path
ID field indicating to which path the acknowledged PSNs relate to. Notice that
if the multipath extension was not negotiated during the connection handshake,
the ACK frame is the same as the one presented in {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}.

Since frames are independent of packets, and the path notion relates to the
packets, the ACK frames can be sent on any path, unlike Multipath TCP
{{RFC6824}} which is constrained to send ACKs on the same path.


New Frames
==========

To support the multipath operations, new frames have been defined to
coordinate hosts. This draft uses a type field containing 0x20 to indicate
that the frame is related to multipath operations.


MAX_PATHS Frame
---------------

The MAX_PATHS frame is used by hosts to control the number of paths that can
be simultaneously in the ACTIVE state on a given connection. The proposed type
for the MAX_PATHS frame is 0x20. A MAX_PATHS frame is shown below.

~~~~~~~~~~
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                          Sequence (i)                       ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                 Num Additional Active Paths (j)             ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #max_paths_frame title="MAX_PATHS Frame"}

The MAX_PATHS frame contains the following fields:

* Sequence: A variable-length integer. This value starts at 0 and increases by
  1 for each change of number of active paths that is provided by the host.

* Num Additional Active Paths: A variable-length integer indicating how many
  additional paths can be used over the connection. The number of paths that
  can be in ACTIVE state is thus (Num Additional Active Paths + 1).

Once the connection is established, hosts MUST assume that the server sent a
MAX_PATHS frame with sequence -1 and number of additional active paths equal to
0 and the client sent a MAX_PATHS frame with sequence -1 and number of
additional active paths equal to the negotiated max_path_id value.


PATH_UPDATE Frame
-----------------

The PATH_UPDATE frame is used by a host either to migrate a path or to close
it. This indicates to the remote that the closed path MUST NOT be used anymore
and it can use the proposed one instead, if any. The proposed type for the
PATH_UPDATE is 0x21. A PATH_UPDATE frame is shown below.

~~~~~~~~~~
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                        Closed Path ID (j)                   ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                       Proposed Path ID (j)                  ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #migrate_path_frame title="MIGRATE_PATH Frame"}

The MIGRATE_PATH frame contains the following fields:

* Closed Path ID: A variable-length integer corresponding to the Path ID of
  the path that is closed.

* Proposed Path ID: A variable-length integer corresponding to the Path ID of
  the path that substitutes the closed path. If the value is 0, no path is
  proposed.

Upon the transmission or the reception of the PATH_UPDATE frame, the path with
the Path ID referenced in Closed Path ID MUST be in the CLOSED state. If the
proposed Path ID is different of 0, the path MUST have been either in the
PROPOSED or in the UNUSABLE state and MUST now be considered as ACTIVE.


ADD_ADDRESS Frame
-----------------

The ADD_ADDRESS frame is used by a host to advertise its currently reachable
addresses. The proposed type for the ADD_ADDRESS frame is 0x22. An ADD_ADDRESS
frame is shown below.

~~~~~~~~~~
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|0|0|0|P|IPVers.|Address ID (8) |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                       IP Address (32/128)                   ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|          [Port (16)]          |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #add_address_frame title="ADD_ADDRESS Frame"}

The ADD_ADDRESS frame contains the following fields:

* Reserved bits: the three most-significant bits of the first byte are set to
  0, and are reserved for future use.

* P bit: the fourth most-significant bit of the first byte indicates, if set,
  the presence of the Port field.

* IPVers.: the remaining four least-significant bits of the first byte
  contain the version of the IP address contained in the IP Address field.

* Address ID: an unique identifier for the advertised address for tracking and
  removal purposes. This is needed when, e.g., a NAT changes the IP address
  such that both hosts see different IP addresses for a same path endpoint.

* IP Address: the advertised IP address, in network order.

* Port: this optional field indicates the port number related to the
  advertised IP address. When this field is present, it indicates that a path
  can use the 2-tuple (IP addr, port).


Upon reception of an ADD_ADDRESS frame, the receiver SHOULD store the
communicated address for future use. The receiver MUST NOT send packets others
than validation ones to the communicated address without having validated it.
ADD_ADDRESS frames SHOULD contain globally reachable addresses. Link-local and
possibly private addresses SHOULD NOT be exchanged.


REMOVE_ADDRESS Frame
--------------------

The REMOVE_ADDRESS frame is used by a host to signal that a previously
announced address was lost. The proposed type for the REMOVE_ADDRESS frame is
0x23. A REMOVE_ADDRESS frame is shown below.

~~~~~~~~~~
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|Address ID (8) |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #remove_address_frame title="REMOVE_ADDRESS Frame"}

The frame contains only one field, Address ID, being the identifier of the
address to remove. A host SHOULD stop using paths using the removed address
and set them in the UNUSABLE state. If the REMOVE_ADDRESS contains an Address
ID that was not previously announced, the receiver MUST silently ignore the
frame.


PATHS Frame
-----------

The PATHS frame communicates the paths state of the sending host to the peer.
It allows the sender to communicate its active paths to the peer in order to
detect potential connectivity issue over paths. Its proposed type is 0x24. The
format of the PATHS frame is shown below.

~~~~~~~~~~
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                          Sequence (i)                       ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                        ActivePaths (j)                      ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                     Path Info Section (*)                   ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #paths_frame title="PATHS Frame"}

The PATHS frame contains the following fields:

* Sequence: A variable-length integer. This value starts at 0 and increases by
  1 for each PATHS frame sent by the host. It allows identifying the most
  recent PATHS frame.

* ActivePaths: the current number of additional paths considered as being
  active from the sender point of view, i.e., (the number of active paths -
  1). ActivePaths MUST be lower or equal to the last value advertised by
  MAX_PATHS frame.

* Path Info Section: contains information about all the active paths (i.e.,
  there are ActivePaths + 1 entries). The format of this section is shown
  below.

~~~~~~~~~~
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                         Path ID 0 (j)                       ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|LocAddrID 0 (8)|
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
                               ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                         Path ID N (j)                       ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|LocAddrID N (8)|
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #path_info_section title="Path Info Section"}

The fields in the Path Info Section are:

* Path ID: the Path ID of the active path the sending host provides
  information about.

* LocAddrID: the local Address ID of the address currently used by the path.

The Path Info section only contains the Local Address ID so far, but this
section can be extended later with other potentially useful information.


Security Considerations
=======================

Nonce Computation {#nonce-considerations}
-----------------

With Multipath QUIC, each path has its own packet number space. With the
current nonce computation {{I-D.ietf-quic-tls}}, using twice the same packet
number over two different paths leads to the same cryptographic nonce.
Depending on the size of the Initial Value (and hence the nonce), there are
two ways to mitigate this issue.

If the Initial Value has a length of 8 bytes, then a packet number used on a
given path MUST NOT be reused on another path of the connection, and therefore
at most 2^64 packets can be sent on a QUIC connection. This means there will
be packet number skipping at path level, but the packet number will remain
monotonically increasing on each path.

If the Initial Value has a length of 9 or more, then the cryptographic nonce
computation is now performed as follows. The nonce, N, is formed by combining
the packet protection IV (either client_pp_iv_n or server_pp_iv_n) with the
Path ID and the packet number. The 64 bits of the reconstructed QUIC packet
number in network byte order is left-padded with zeros to the size of the IV.
The Path ID encoded in its variable-length format described in
{{variable-length-pid}} is right-padded with zeros to the size of the IV. The
Path IV is computed as the exclusive OR of the padded Path ID and the IV. The
exclusive OR of the padded packet number and the Path IV forms the AEAD nonce.


Validation of Exchanged Addresses {#validation_address}
---------------------------------

To use addresses communicated by the peer through ADD_ADDRESS frames, hosts are
required to validate them before using paths to these addresses. The main
reason for this validation is that the remote host might have sent, purposely
or not, a packet with a source IP that does not correspond to the IP of the
remote interface. This could lead to amplification attacks where the client
start using a new path with a source IP corresponding to the victim's one.
Without validation, the server might then flood the victim. Similarly for
ADD_ADDRESS frames, a malicious server might advertise the IP address of a
victim, hoping that the client will use it without validating it before.


IANA Considerations
===================

QUIC Transport Parameter Registry
---------------------------------

This document defines a new transport parameter for the negotiation of
multiple paths. The following entry in {{iana-tp-table}} should be added to
the "QUIC Transport Parameters" registry under the "QUIC Protocol" heading.

| Value  | Parameter Name | Specification     |
|:-------|:---------------|:------------------|
| 0x0020 | max_path_id    | {{tp-definition}} |
{: #iana-tp-table title="Addition to QUIC Transport Parameters Entries"}


Acknowledgements
================

We would like to thanks Masahiro Kozuka and Kazuho Oku for their numerous
comments on the first version of this draft. We also thanks Philipp Tiesel for
his early comments that led to the current design. We also want to thanks
Christian Huitema for his draft about multipath requirements to identify
critical elements about the multipath feature.


--- back

Change Log
==========

Since draft-deconinck-multipath-quic-00
-------------------------------

- Added PATH_UPDATE frame
- Added MAX_PATHS frame
- No more packet header change
- Implicit Path ID notification using Connection ID and NEW_CONNECTION_ID   
  frames
- Variable-length encoding for Path ID
- Updated text to match draft-ietf-quic-transport-10
- Fixed various typos
